[Music]
[Applause]
thank you
I appreciate that one when you get to be
87 people stand and applaud at the start
because they're not sure whether you're
going to be around at the end of that
and it's great to be with this group and
it it was eight years ago
I just turned 80 I never really talked
any graduation groups or anything of the
sort it was not on my bucket list
particularly and then I got invited to
go to LaGuardia to the LaGuardia
Community College and and I met a truly
remarkable group that I did you know
whether it was male female Hispanic
african-american whatever it might be
these people had one thing in common you
know they knew they had it in themselves
they knew they could be something beyond
where they were they were willing to put
their time their energies to better
themselves and behind them as I saw when
I got to the graduation on September
22nd they had a frequently they had
parents who were crying as they received
it it doesn't receive the degrees they
had spouses they had siblings it was it
was one of the great experiences of my
life and at that point I was hooked
so I went to New Orleans I went to
Chicago I went to Detroit I went to
Cleveland I went to Baltimore and I met
the most remarkable group of people and
if you'd told me that twenty-two or
twenty-three hundred out of all those
people would be here just eight years
later of having proven yourself to
yourself what you really could do with
more skills it's just remarkable so I I
would like to just tell you a couple of
short stories and we'll draw maybe a
couple of lessons from them as I came in
Mike Bloomberg was talking
and he he talked about immigrants and I
echo his remarks but I would I would
like to tell you of two women that each
sold the business to Berkshire Hathaway
to me actually for many many many
millions of dollars both of them started
with twenty five hundred dollars by a
coincidence was the exact same Ahmad it
was everything they had in the world and
one of them was a woman who landed in
Seattle in 1917 couldn't speak a word of
English had a tag around her neck the
tag said Fort Dodge Iowa the Red Cross
got her a Ford dodge where she was
reunited with her husband who had come
to the country a couple of years earlier
and she lived in Fort Dodge for two
years and as she put it she felt like a
dummy she couldn't pick up the language
and she couldn't learn a word and so she
decided and she and her husband decided
to move to Omaha so they came to Omaha
in 1919 and there she found a small
colony of Russian Jews so she started
feeling more at home and then as her
oldest daughter went to school she would
come home this daughter Frances and she
would teach her mother the words she
learned in school that day and this
woman rose bumpkin spent 20 years saving
money bringing first her siblings over
her mother and father fifty dollars at a
time she sold used clothing to do it she
had four children during this period and
by 1937 after 20 years
she saved $2,500 she went to Chicago and
she bought what she could have furnished
heard her dream had always been to open
a furniture store
and this woman would never gone to
school one day in her life with $2,500
but with the same spirit that the people
in this room had about having a dream
and working to accomplish that dream she
built a business which she sold me in
1983 for 60 million dollars
approximately in which which did a
billion and a half dollars worth of
business last year the fourth generation
is working in that business
this woman rose blumpkin lived well she
she worked for me until she was 103 and
now then I'm not said then she retired
and she died the next year which is the
lesson to all of her churns managers a
pretty mature retirement nothing you
can't tell what's going to happen but
mrs. B with her $2,500 one further fact
about her she could not read or write
and she went into a furniture business
and she didn't bring anything in unique
in furniture but she brought a
determination to succeed she knew she
could outwork anyone else she knows she
cared about her customers she worked at
very low gross margins but she built
this incredible business and I saw one
other woman who did a similar thing with
$2,500 I paid her hundreds of billions
of the heart for her business so I
decided to go to the source and get
these people before you know like
I don't want you guys coming around to
be asking me hundreds of millions of
dollars I'd like to join in with you
much earlier so I'm I've followed this
group and today I'd like to tell you
about one other small business person
this person I went to buy his business
from him and he turned me down which was
very wise but this was a fellow who was
born about eight years before I was he
was born in 1922 he was a we'll call him
jack lived in the Midwest he was a
pretty good athlete didn't like school
much and I'm going to tell you one thing
early in the story maybe you can figure
out who the guy was the company he built
hires more college graduates each year
than any other company in the United
States had this fellow who was destined
for this but did not know it jack what
does college for a year and then dropped
out he really wasn't that interested in
the school and the year he dropped out
was 1941 and when the country became the
United States became under attack he
went down to the Army Air Force
recruiting station volunteered and they
turned him down because he had hay fever
so he went over to the Navy and again
volunteered and they took him they put
him on an aircraft carrier
he flew small fighter planes during
World War two two Distinguished Flying
crosses from the from the Navy and then
he came back to the Midwest so now we've
got a young guy probably by this time he
would be 23 or 24 years old and the
interesting thing
as he got back to the Midwest and he
actually kind of went from one job to
another for a short period of or not
such a short period of time and he
finally became a used car salesman at
the at a Cadillac dealership in st.
Louis Missouri and at age 35 having
moved up in the organization the sales
organization he said to his boss could I
go into car leasing business with you
the boss said well if you'll cut your
salary in half and you'll come up with
it was $25,000 which he borrowed we can
become partners in a car leasing company
so my friend Jack started at age 35 at
the car leasing business and he had
seven cars it was pretty slow in fact
one of the things he did was whenever
the phone rang he let it ring three or
four times so people would think that he
was very busy answering other phones and
of course was the only call he was gonna
get all day so his first venture was
okay but it wasn't really going to go
anyplace and there's a lesson in this
for all of us at age 40 he decided with
17 vehicles 17 cars he was going to go
into competition in the rental and the
rent-a-car business so now he's taking
on Hertz and Avis and national and
people like that who have hundreds and
hundreds of thousands of cars and he's
got 17 cars and his cars aren't any
different than theirs I mean he's buying
them from General Motors or Ford or
Chrysler and he can't get the airport
locations those companies have them all
sewed up but he was determined that he
would basically offer the customer got
all from a different car but he can
offer him friendlier service than
they've ever seen
and so he started the company he named
it after the battleship that he'd flown
from in the Pacific which was the USS
Enterprise and he died about the year
and a half ago but when he died his
rent-a-car company starting with those
seventeen cars was worth more than Hertz
and Avis and all the rest of the rental
cars put together the man's name was
Jack Taylor and his son Andy tailors of
the friend of mine runs the business now
a grandchild was in the business
they'll probably a fourth generation
long line so this this man in the United
States he didn't invent artificial
intelligence you know he didn't do
anything that just like mrs. B selling
furniture I mean that any one of us
could have entered those businesses but
he lived by them by the Creed basically
of of delighting his customers and
working with people and establishing the
relationship with them so that they in
turn would wanted to light the customers
even he couldn't go out there and take
care of every Ronald Clark
possibility but he he learned how to
project himself and his attitude toward
his fellow man and his desire you know
to make a friend out of every customer
he managed to take very ordinary cars
and turn them into this extraordinary
business from virtually nothing at and
it illustrates several points one is you
don't necessarily get it right to
further exactly right the first time I
mean the car leasing business you know
basically we're competing on the cost of
money to finance cars and
and it's very hard to delight a customer
went to just give him the car and tell
him send you a monthly check for five
years and you'll be back at that time so
his talents were being wasted basically
in that business but at the age of 40
with all about experience behind him he
found he he he found the golden key and
he he took a very ordinary business and
turned it into an absolutely
extraordinary operation just like mrs. B
a rose bumpkin did with furniture and
the he didn't worry about whether the
Federal Reserve was mine to tighten her
ease he didn't worry about whether the
stock market was up or down yesterday
he didn't he didn't worry about the
things he couldn't change but he did
worry he did focus on the one thing he
could change and that was the customers
experience and I have seen the one I
didn't the one that got away enterprise
I went down to Florida and tried to talk
him into selling the burner and he was
smart enough not to do it probably the
value of the company is quadrupled since
I made that visit but he he was smart
enough to see that he would find that
business Henry Ford as you may know
failed twice before he started the Ford
Motor Company in 1903 I mean the the
test isn't whether you get the greatest
does this idea in the world the first
time out the test is whether you keep
learning as you go along what your
strengths are and what you can do for
your customers what you can bring
especially to the party and to do that
you need you need the education that
that I know you've received through
10,000 small businesses but you need a
genuine
a genuine desire day-in day-out to
delight the customer I've never I've
never seen a business I've seen a lot of
businesses but I've never seen one that
delight the customer that that doesn't
succeed I mean what you want is that
customer the next day when they think do
I want to rent a car or do I want to buy
some furniture what goes through their
mind you know it's the place where
they've had a great experience I don't
know what I paid for this type actually
probably if somebody gave it to me for
the purposes of the speech I will say I
I have no idea but why they are the
shirt I'm wearing others but I do know I
will remember how I was treated what I
bought it I mean you long forget about
the price but you never forget whether
you had a good experience or a porridge
furnace with the purchase experience and
you'll have a hard time finding a person
that's had a wonderful experience of the
lighted experience in purchasing
anything that isn't going to come back
and similarly if the memory is of
rudeness indifference and I'm whatever
it may be they're never going to come
back and as a small business owner and
as you grow you have to not only be able
to project that interest in people's
well-being in delighting them yourself
but you have to do it through other
people and you won't be able to do it
through people who themselves do not
feel they're being fairly treated that
their views aren't aren't appropriately
considered so you really do have to
learn to multiply yourself through other
people and I advise I advise the young
people to come to Oman we have a lot of
a number of classes and the key is to is
to certainly in terms of your personal
life the most important decision you
make me you'll make is is the spouse
that most of you will likely have and
it's very important to surround your
people yourself with people are the
better than you are you are going to
move in the direction of the people you
associate with so you'll constantly
I've been enormously lucky in that
respect I'm you know the I've just had
teachers and and friends and a spouse
that really was a better person I was
and I had enough sense to learn from
these people that that life went better
if you behave better yourself and it
took a while so I I advise you to seek
out as your partner in business your
partner life whatever it may be look for
the people that actually are examples to
you rather than somebody that you need
to do you think you need to straighten
out yourself and simple rules like that
the lighting customers working through
other people associated with people live
alone will cause you to move in a better
path that you might otherwise have they
will take you so far in life that it's
hard to believe I mean they they took
rose bumpkin without being able to speak
a word of English and couldn't read or
write and they took her to what is now a
billion and a half dollar business and
then certainly there's been no money put
in it since the twenty-five hundred
dollars
that's been the total capital Payton and
in the Nebraska Furniture Mart and I
think if you looked at enterprise I
don't know their books the same way but
my guess is that that very little equity
capital has been added to enterprise
over the years the the business built on
itself so I want to tell you I admire
this group enormous Lee when I when I
met dr. Melos class on September 22nd
eight years ago I I was thrilled and I I
admire people that are doing what you
have done youth you know working hard at
your job at the same time you took on
and added and added
really a lot of hard work to further
your skills 99% graduate a minute it's a
mind-blowing statistic and I'm looking
at I'm looking I'm looking at 2,200
people here who I admired I'm cheering
for you and I can tell you the best is
yet to come
thank you
[Applause]